hey guys there was a time when I got
asked this question a lot and now here I
am years later answering a lot of
suppose I used to get asked all the time
in person face-to-face by email what I
thought of a Buddhist meditation what my
own experiences were and what my advice
was for other people and I'm really
answering it now because I'm in a new
relationship with a new girlfriend and
just in the last couple of days we've
been talking a lot about the history of
Buddhism in general my own experiences
of former scholar of Buddhism and what
my position on these various topics may
be so in this way in a relaxed
down-to-earth fashion just record
another long video with my girlfriend
discussing what my position on
meditation isn't isn't and it occurs to
me that I could make short video here
just discussing how I have in the past
directly face-to-face with Buddhists and
of course sometimes by email debated the
issue of meditation so this is not a
hypothetical debate this is not what
would you say as a secular atheist what
would you say as a nihilist if you were
to sit down and talk about these things
with Buddhists I have talked with these
things that Buddhists these are this
video was gonna summarize the type of
conversation debate that I've had in
Thailand that I've had in Sri Lanka that
I've had in Canada that I've had with
people who describe themselves as
secular scholars of Buddhism people with
PhDs and that I've had with Buddhist
monks you know wearing the full uniform
wearing the robe formally preaching
Buddhism with no pretense of being
secular outside of the religion and of
course that I've discussed with
laypeople in between in my other video
at some more length I mentioned very
simple fundamental issue of feeling
tingling in your arm if you flex the
muscle in your arm very simple point but
in contrast to all of the hallowed
cultural assumptions religious
assumptions supernatural assumptions
that are added on to altered states of
mind experiences in your mind you might
have when meditating that are just a
little bit out of the ordinary I point
out first and foremost in these
discussions that simply if you if you
flex the muscles
your arm and hold it if you just create
that tension in your arm until you can't
hold it anymore
you just put strain put stress on those
organs in a slightly unfamiliar way at
the end of that process you get a
strange sense of tingling but I do not
add any other meanings on to that I
regard that as meaningless is it so
surprising that if you put a certain
type of unfamiliar strain on your mind
holding a particular thought holding a
particular image a particular attitude
thinking in a particular way a
particular focus particularly focused
way or what-have-you
there are many many different types of
meditation some of them could be
described as focusing the mind some of
them can be described as unfocused in
the mind but in any case just like it
doesn't really matter if you are flexing
the arm like this or if you're flexing
in another position it's just the strain
of holding your arm in any position is
gonna produce tingling of some kind your
mind is an organ your mind is a product
of biological evolution your mind
naturally left to its own devices is
going to flit from one attitude to
another from one mood to another it's
gonna respond to stimuli and pretty much
all forms of Buddhist meditation you
might even extend this to Hindu
meditation and other religions they're
based on a notion of constricting the
mind in brief putting strain and stress
on the mind in one of several unfamiliar
ways or switching between unfamiliar
ways and yes that can produce tingling
it can produce unfamiliar sensations
caused by that strain itself or caused
by the relief at the end of that period
of strain when you relax the mind when
you cease to hold that image in your
mind when you cease to think in that
peculiar way now again I mentioned in
the other video a much longer video
sometimes the people I was talking to
had a really extreme emotional rush to
this really extreme one in one case it
was just by email but I later found out
from the person
person doctor so I knew that they wept
at that time and then they wept when
telling the intermediary person you got
the story to me they found this really
devastating just this line of inquiry
and indeed you know I am an experienced
toy people face-to-face we're already at
this stage I think partly because what
I'm saying resonates with the experience
these Buddhist practitioners have had it
resonates with their own experience
meditating and partly because the
philosophy of Buddhism itself in terms
of its critique of mind and body and so
on that also in some ways prepares them
for this skeptical approach to the
merely empirical experience of what
they've felt and what they've seen while
meditating right and note this isn't
disputing that they've felt unusual
things I mean the point is yes if you
strain the body in a peculiar way you're
gonna have peculiar feelings tingling
what-have-you if you strain the mind in
a peculiar way either than gonna have
some peculiar feelings but why are we
assigning transcendental significance to
them why are we assigning magical
significance to them what is the dotted
line that connects these unfamiliar
sensations with any particular
philosophy the philosophy of Buddhism
the philosophy of Catholicism or you
know your previous incarnations in a
prior life all the mythology that gets
attached to these fleeting sensations
that are induced in the mind through
these exercises the second image I've
employed in these debates was of a man
carrying a heavy stone on his back while
walking back and forth in a room now
again if you know Buddhism this image
comes pretty close to some some imagery
we use within Buddhist philosophy within
Buddhist dogmatix if you like you know
you may not have this experience as a
form of exercise but if you're carrying
a heavy stone on your back whether
you're walking up a hill or walking back
forth or whatever that the scenario is
when you put that stone down there were
remarkable feelings in the human body
feelings of elation feelings of
feelings of liberation even you know on
a physical level and also on a mental
and emotional level you know putting
down a heavy stone that you've been
carrying if you really had this
experience viscerally as well as kind of
psycho emotionally it's remarkable
what what an impact that can have on you
so yeah this is this image is not
hypothetical Fiat what I mean this is
really empirical experience we're
talking about but if you do that if you
give yourself that exercise to give
yourself that challenge you decide to
carry a heavy stone up the hill and then
you put it down you may I mean the
moment you put down that stone you may
spring up and have a trim you certainly
feel very light on your feet you know
you spring up and you feel elated you
feel joy you feel liberated from the you
feel liberated from the literal
oppression of having this stone you're
back what what does that really mean you
know again the issue with the tingling
in the arm I'm not disputing that you
feel that way but I'm challenging you
you've put yourself in this very
unnatural situation where in your body
and your mind you're inducing these
feelings and there's a sense of there's
a sense of which they're real you know I
mean I'm not gonna tell you that's an
unreal feeling like many other forms of
you know athletic exertion just mountain
climbing you know mountain climbing
especially knowing it very very high
altitudes with thin air and so on all
kinds of people actually have you know
anecdotes of the exhaustion and oxygen
deprivation even inducing hallucinations
but sense a sense of euphoria a sense of
you know joy and so on you can have all
these very strange emotional reactions
to just this kind of physical strain put
on the body and again most the time when
I was speaking to experienced Buddhist
practitioners whether they were
laypeople or monks whether they had PhDs
and spent their time in university or if
they spend their time literally in a
cave and the mountains you know um
whatever the background was I normally
didn't have to spell out the rest of the
argument for them what is the dotted
line connecting this physical sense this
mood this feeling to the philosophy you
claim to the supernatural cosmology you
claim yeah and as
say a lot of people I talk to you about
extreme emotional reactions to this and
they've recognized the truth of what I
was saying perhaps just because the
approach to the issue I was
demonstrating was itself aesthetically
and structurally so similar to the way
the classical put his philosophy itself
raises these questions engaged these
things um as soon as we're addressing
feelings as feelings all of the
pretensions of Buddhist philosophy fall
apart if we're just able to address the
outcomes of these meditative methods as
feelings not as spheres I mean a lot of
people will use this kind of fit clang
guack not as another plane of existence
but just as feelings as soon as you get
people to recognize that then already
what they've recognized is they're
engaged in an exercise that's no more
supernatural than flexing your arm or
carrying a rock on your back back and
forth across the floor they've engaged
in exercise that is in many ways much
more pointless than for example
practicing mathematics on a chalkboard
you know with a piece of chalk or many
other says we could do that do strain
the mind in one way or another it's a
completely abstract dead ended and
pointless form of stress and strain that
they've put on their minds to no
particular end except that exhaustion a
type of exhaustion not so different from
carrying the rock back and forth just so
they can have the experience of
liberation from that exhaustion when
they place that rock down and I don't
even deny the feeling of liberation I
don't deny the feeling of ecstasy they
may have I don't deny the hallucinate
hallucinatory experiences may have had
also what I insist on is that this
liberation in itself is meaningless and
that they have had a set of cultural and
religious presuppositions that they try
to attach to this experience and in fact
the experience they've had has nothing
more to do with Buddhism than it has to
do with Catholicism or
communism or any other ideology the
experience fails to validate the
ideology and the ideology itself also
fails to provide the experience it would
be as absurd as carrying that stone up a
mountain putting the stone down then
feeling so elated feeling this rush of
energy vitality what have you this joy
to be liberated after after putting down
the stone and then turning around and
worshipping that stone as your God